Through The Silicon Looking Glass
=================================

## Abstract
There are many parts of the modern world that seem to run on a strange type of magic. A sorcery based on doped silicates and rare earths. With a little attention this magic looses it's sheen and the sufficiently advanced technology can be revealed. In this article I will cover how some of the most fundamental parts of modern computing can be demystified.

### Program Execution
To run a program it must be read from *Secondary storage*, storage that is not immediately available to the processor. This is because *Primary storage*, storage that is directly available to the processor, such as *Random Access Memory, RAM* or Cache cannot survive reboots i.e. when you reboot the computer the data does not persist. So upon booting the CPU asks the primary storage for the first *Partition* on it. This partition usually contains the *Basic Input Output System, BIOS* on older computers or the *Extended Firmware Interface, EFI* loader on newer ones. The purpose of these peices of software is to set up hardware in a way that allow it to be used by the *Operating System*, and usually to start the *Boot loader* which finally loads the *Operating System*: all this, by the way, happens in a fraction of a second well before any `Windows` logo shows up. Lets go into one of the smallest parts of the bios, the single *Instruction*; Lets assume that the CPU has just finished handling the last instruction. A *Register*, a fast segment of memory under direct control of the CPU, called the *Program counter* is copied into another register called the *Memory address register*. The contents of this register is sent to the RAM on a pathway called an *Address bus*, busses used to be parrelel bundles of cable but they like other old parts of compter archetecture have been updated and nowerdays they refer to any way of transferring signals from one component to another. Once at the RAM, the *Ram controller* searches the RAM for the data and sends it back to the CPU on the *Data bus*. While it arrives the CPU, the program counter is incremented the data from the data bus is copied into the *Memory Buffer Register*; from here it is copied by the CPU's *Control Unit* into the *Current Instuction Register*. The control unit then splits up the instruction into *Opcode, The Type of Operation* and *Operand, The things to be operated on*. These get sent to the *Arithmatic Logic Unit, ALU* which finally performs the operation and stores it in a temporary register called the accumulator untill it can be put to better use.


### User Input
When you press the key on a key board a *Membrane* under the key is compressed. This compression generates a signal which is sent to the *Microprocessor* on the keyboard itself. The microprocessor handles and processes this data into a form that the rest of the computer can read. This is then sent to the aptly named *Programmable interrupt controller, PIC* in the form of *Scan codes*, which are usually a list of numbers indicating which keys have been pressed. Once at the scan codes have arrived the controller sends the *Central Processing Unit, CPU* an *Interrupt*, a signal that tells the CPU to drop everything and handle the request. Upon finishing it's current instruction the CPU checks the PIC for an interrupt and if one has happened the CPU jumps to the location in memory that contains the part of the *Operating System, OS* that handles that type of request. Once the operating system acknowledges the interrupt it then gathers data i.e. what keys were pressed, which modifiers were pressed (Shift, Control), bundles this data up and sends it to the currently running program. This program then decides how to handle the *Key-event*, e.g. to display it on screen in a Search Bar. On average this happens 3-4 times a second for the keyboard, and much more often for things like mouse movement which follows a similar process.


### Visual Output
Your *monitor* and *graphics cards* are *periferals* just like the keyboard and mouse: but unlike the keyboard and mouse, which use interrupts the graphics card use something called mapped memory. This means that for example setting the value of the 753664th memory could be the start of the screen buffer, an area of memory that contains the colours of the screen pixels. So to display an image a program would have to load the image into RAM from whatever source it needed, set the mode of the display to tell it to render graphics and not text and then display it into the *buffer* that the graphics card expects. As well as this if the program needs complex image manipulations it could send commands from a standard like OpenGL or Direct3D which provide high-level interfaces to the graphics hardware. The graphics card converts this data into digital (or analogue depending on age and connection type) signals that the monitor can understand. The monitor, which is essentially a backlight covered by color and polarising filters, then blocks out light by using a filter polarised at 90 degrees to the constant filter at the sub-pixel level. See [Fig 1] for a visual representation.

### A Cat Photo

So now we have the three of the four main aspects of modern computing: input, processing and output. The final one, abstraction is one of the harder ones to describe due to its abstract nature. So lets tackle it with something simple, a cat photo. When you click on a button you are interacting with the *application layer*, this layer is composed of the user and application handling raw data: images, text, html files etc. The next layer is the presentation layer, this layer deals with the *protocols and interfaces* used by the sender and reciever, in this case you are **usually** using *http* a protocol for sending documents over the internet in the form of *requests* and *responses*. The request looks something like `GET www.mycoolsite.tldshavegonetoofar/imgs/cat.gif HTTP/1.1`, breaking this down the `GET` portion means that the request one that retrives data, there are others like PUT, DELETE and TRACE but for now get will do; the `www.mycoolsite.tldshavegonetoofar/imgs/cat.gif` tells the reciever, in this instance known as a *server* that the thing we want is stored at the location `/imgs/cat.gif` on the web server at `mycoolsite.tldshavegonetoofar`. This data is sent as raw bytes to the  The server then responds with a HTTP response this is formed of a *status line*, the line contains the version number, the status code (e.g. 200, 404, 101), and a phrase (e.g. OK, File not Found, Switching Protocols). This is also the layer usually incharge of encryption. The next layer is called the session layer which is a layer that controls (initiates, manages and terminates) connections between computers, this layer is usually explictly created in software, that is it is your web browser's job to handle these connections; this layer is the lowest layer still under control of the application. Underneath that there is the transport layer, this layer and the ones below it are responsible for transforming the data presented into a form that can be sent across a wire, or over radio waves, which splits the data into packets gives them a way of identifing what application they were sent from and what order they were sent in this layer also deals with the actual routing and path finding of the packets. To transfer the data between the individual computers, called *nodes* the transport layer uses another layer, the *network* layer which adds MAC and IP addresses to identify the source and destination nodes. Delivery of the packets on the network layer is *not* **guaranteed** to be reliable, i.e packets can be dropped, if they have been dropped they are usually resent with a few confirming checks. Under this there is yet another layer called the *data link layer* which splits packets into *frames* with a header and footer to destinguish the current packet from other packets on the same network. Finnally you get down to the physical layer this layer defines the electrical and physical properties of the connection, for example the specification for an ethernet cable is part of the physical layer. Now that we have gotten past all the abstractions in modern networking lets get back to the cat photo. After the request has been sent the transport layer selects calculates the  path between you and the server; the network layer handles the transmission to the next router in the path; the data-link and physical layers actually transfer the data to the next router in the chain. When at the next router it performs the same set of calculations and sends it on to the next router, so on unill the destination is reached. At the destination the server's end the server's layers apply the inverse transformation that the clients layers did so the server application could get the request. It then sees that this is an image request and then creates a response with that image's bytes imbedded. It then sends the response back in the same way, where you decode it and your web browser finnally takes that cat photo data, decompresses it and finally puts it on your screen

### Conclusion
I hope that this article has made some of strange eccentricitieys of the modern world slightly clearer and encouraged you to experiment with, and possibly break, things that seem to take a little bit too long
